Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on computer hardware.
This concept looks scary, don't worry.
We brought snacks and metaphors.
Concept explanation.
So what is this hardware
business all about?
Simply put, computer hardware
refers to all the physical, tangible
components of a computer system.
These are the parts you can see,
touch, and probably shouldn't drop.
It includes every single electronic
and mechanical part that makes
a computer come to life from the
powerful central processing unit.
Or CPU all the way to your
humble keyboard and mouse.
You see, without this hardware,
all the fancy software in the world
would have nothing to run on, and a
computer system simply wouldn't exist.
Let's look at the key
players in this team.
First is the central processing unit,
often called the brain of the computer.
This little genius performs
most of the processing.
Then we have memory.
Ram Random access memory, which
is like the computer's temporary
scratch pad for data and programs.
The CPU is currently juggling.
It's volatile, meaning poof,
the data is gone when the power
is off for keeping things safe.
We have storage devices
like a hard disk drive.
HDD or a solid state drive.
This is the permanent home for
your operating system software
and all those precious files.
Data stays here even
when the computer is off.
The motherboard is the main circuit board,
the master connector that allows all
these other parts to talk to each other.
Think of it as the central nervous system.
We also have input devices which you use
to feed data into the computer, like a
keyboard, mouse, scanner, or microphone.
And to get information back out,
we use output devices like a
monitor, printer or speakers.
The graphics processing Unit is
a specialized circuit designed to
rapidly handle images for your screen.
Finally, the power supply Unit PSU is
the component that takes power from
the wall and converts it into the right
voltage for all the other parts to use.
Real world relevance.
Now you might ask, sir, why
do I need to know this ra?
It's very useful.
Understanding computer hardware
helps professionals troubleshoot
basic system issues and use
banking software more efficiently.
Ensuring smooth daily operations for
troubleshooting, you can identify and
resolve hardware problems quickly.
For performance, you can optimize
your system for better productivity.
For decision making, you can make smart
choices when buying or upgrading systems.
And for data management, you
can handle customer data and
transactions more effectively.
Breakdown of question types based
on what you'll see in your exam.
Questions on this topic
fall into a few categories.
About 40% of questions are all
about identification of components
asking you to name apart from
its description or picture.
Around 30% are on functionality
and purpose testing.
If you know what a specific
component actually does.
Another 15% will be on examples of devices
where you'll have to classify something
as an input output or storage device.
Roughly 10% will cover memory and
storage concepts like the types of memory
storage units from bits to terabytes
and the differences between them.
The final 5% is on interconnection
and ports dealing with how things
connect, like via USB or HDMI.
Formulas and tricks for computer hardware.
Forget about mathematical formulas.
Instead, focus on these clever
memory tricks and key facts to
distinguish input versus output.
Just think in for data bowing into
the computer, like from a keyboard
or mouse and out for data coming
out like on a monitor or printer.
For volatile versus non-volatile memory.
Remember this little rhyme ram is random
and remembers data randomly, meaning
only when power is on, so it's volatile.
But RO is read only memory and
maintains data even with no
power, so it's non-volatile.
And here's the storage hierarchy
from fastest to slowest.
It starts with CPU registers,
then cash, Ram, S-S-D-H-D.
Optical drives.
And finally, magnetic tape.
And please, please
remember your memory units.
One nibble is four bits,
one byte is eight bits.
Then we climb the ladder.
One kilobyte or KB is 1 0 2 4 bytes,
one megabyte or MB is 1 0 2 4K.
One gigabyte or GB is 1 0 2 4 MB
and one terabyte or TB is 1 0 2 4
gb and it keeps going up from there.
Methods of solving.
When you face a question,
use these methods.
First is direct recall for
identifying a component.
You just pull the answer from your brain.
Next is function-based classification.
If asked to categorize a device,
just think, does it put information
in, get information out, or
store it for multiple choice?
Use elimination.
If you're not sure, get rid of the
answers that are definitely wrong.
With contextual understanding, you can
figure out port questions by thinking
about what devices usually plug in there.
And for comparison questions like
RAM versus Rom use comparison and
contrast by looking at their key
features like speed and volatility.
Shortcuts and smart techniques
want some smart techniques.
Use acronym expansion.
Knowing CPU RAM or SSD in full
form often reveals their function.
Use visual association.
Try to picture the parts inside
a computer to help you remember.
Look for keywords.
Temporary storage almost always means ram.
Brain of the computer is your CPU, and
try to trace the process flow of data
mentally from input to CPU for processing,
to memory, for temporary holding, to
storage for saving, and finally to output
common mistakes and misconceptions.
All right.
Let's talk about the common traps.
A big one is confusing RAM and storage.
Many people think RAM is
where files are saved forever.
No, RAM is a temporary workspace.
Your HDD or SSD is for permanent storage.
Then there's the input
versus output mix up.
For example, not realizing a touch screen
is both an input and an output device.
Another one is thinking the CPU versus
the computer are the same thing.
The CPU is just one vital
part inside the computer.
Also, be careful with units of memory.
Don't mix bits and bites.
Remember, one byte equals eight bits,
and the biggest misconception that
software is hardware, software is
just a set of intangible instructions.
Hardware is the physical machine
itself, WH framework summary.
So to summarize it all
quickly, what is it?
The physical, tangible
parts of a computer.
Why is it needed?
It provides the physical
foundation for software to run.
When is it used?
Well, whenever a computer is
used, built or fixed, where is it
found In every computing device
from your PC to your phone.
Who uses it?
Everyone who interacts with the
digital device And how does it work?
The components interact via
electrical signals to process,
store, and transmit information.
Fully worked out examples.
Let's try a question.
Example, one question.
Which of the following is a volatile
memory that temporarily stores data
and programs currently being used
by the CPUA hard disk drive edge dd.
B, read only memory rom C, random
access memory, Ram D. Solid state drive.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Okay, let's solve this.
The keywords are volatile memory
and temporarily stores data.
Volatile means the data
disappears when the power is off.
Let's check the options.
And HDD is non-volatile storage.
Incorrect ROM is also non-volatile.
Incorrect ram is indeed volatile
memory used as the computer's
short-term workspace, correct.
And SSD is also non-volatile
storage incorrect.
So the answer is clearly C,
answer C, random access memory.
Example two.
Question, which of the following is
primarily considered an output device?
A keyboard.
B Mouse, C Microphone, D monitor.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
All right.
This one is about input versus output.
Input devices send data to the computer.
Output devices receive
data from the computer.
A keyboard sends text commands in input.
A mouse sends cursor commands in.
Input.
A microphone sends sound in input.
A monitor displays visual
information out output.
So the only one that is primarily
an output device here is the
monitor Answer D Monitor.
Example three question.
What is the main function of the central
processing unit in a computer system?
A to store large amounts
of data permanently.
B to display visual output to the user.
C to execute instructions
and perform calculations.
D, to provide temporary storage
for active programs and data.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's crack this final one.
We need the main function
of the CPU, the brain.
Let's evaluate our choices.
Storing data permanently.
That's the job of an HDD
or SSD displaying output.
That's the monitor's job.
Providing temporary storage.
That's what RAM does.
Executing instructions and
performing calculations.
Yes, that is the
fundamental role of the CPU.
It's the engine that runs the
whole show answer, see to execute
instructions and perform calculations.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.